Samuel Ahn

Problem: How many ping pong balls would it take to fill an average-sized school bus? Describe each step in your thought process. 

The first thing that comes to mind is to find the total volume on an average-sized bus. After doing some research, the average-sized bus does not really have a set definition, so I will provide exact dimensions for this problem. Length is 12 meters, height is 2 meters, and width is 2.4 meters (using the Blue Bird Vision bus as a template on wikipedia). The total volume comes out to be 57.6 meters^3, assuming it is a rectangular prism.

The next step is to find the total volume of space within the bus becuase the bus contains chairs, which ping pong balls cannot occupy. For simplicity's sake, we will assume one chair to be two piece: the back and the seat. They both have the same width, about 1 meter. The length of the seat is about 0.5 meter and the height is about 0.15 meter. The length of the back is about 0.15 meter as well, and the heigh is about 0.7 meters. The volume for a single chair is 0.075 + 0.105 = 0.18 meters^3. There are about 38 chairs, so the total volume of the chairs is 6.84 meters^3. Thus, the total empty volume is 50.76 meters^3.

Now, at this point, I could find the volume of the ping pong ball by assuming its a cube and dividing it by the total space to get an approximate number of ping pong balls. But that is boring, so let's make a better approximation by assuming they are spheres. The diameter of a ping pong ball is about 40 mm, or 0.04 meter. (From here on, it will be difficult to exlain my thoughts). So, using quarters as tests, I tried to compactly place them. By compactly, I mean that they were treated as circles and touched each other adjacent quarter at one point. Now comes the tricky part. If we did the same with ping pong balls and fill the floor with one layr of ping pong balls, we see that the number of the ping pong balls across the length is not simply the length of the school bus divided by the diamater of a ping pong ball, unlike the width. This is because by compactly organizing them, the effective length of two rows of compactly stored ping pong balls is less the two times the diameter. This is true for two or more rows of ping pong balls. Another thing to note, by assuming the balls are spheres, we can safely assume alternating rows of balls, so that the maximum number of tangency of one layer of balls is six. To calculate this length, we need to use geometry. The key here is to ignored the radius of the top and bottom row. We will add those in later. Now with just three quarters with radius r, organize a compact form, which is each quarter touching each other in two points of tangency. Now connect the centers of the quarters to get an equilateral triangle, with side lengths 2*r. There are two observation to be made here. One is the we need to find the length from a center of a quarter to the center of the equilateral triangle to get part of this new length. However, the second observation is that by adding 3 more quarter to get the formation 1-2-3 pyramid, we notice that the new length is equal to the altitude of the equilateral triangle, which is r *sqrt(3). So the number of rows of ping pong balls in one layer is about [L - 2r]/(r*sqrt(3)), where L is 12 meters and r = 0.02 meter. The number of rows is about 345, alot more than just simply dividing L/(2*r) from assuming balls as cubes. The number of balls alternate per row so the odd numbered rows have W/d balls, while even numbered rows have W/d - 1 balls, where W is 2.4 meters and d = 0.04 meter. Thus, the number of balls in one layer is equal to 173*(60) + 172*(59) = 20528 balls, which is about 2000 more than just assuming the balls were cubes. Now at this point, we can treat the layers as rectangular prisms and use the height to find the answer to this problem. But once again, that is boring so we will find the answer assuming that the balls can stack from one layer to another. So using similar calculations from above, we find the effective height of one layer to be [H - 2r]/(r*sqrt(3)), where H is 2 meters, and r = 0.02 meters. This turns out to be about 56 layers. Now we also have to assume that the layers alternate. So the odd numbered layers have 20528 balls, but how about the even layers since its obviously not as simple as subtracting one. Notice that the number of rows of the even layer is simply one less than the number of rows of the odd layer. Also notice that the odd numbered rows is one less than the odd numbered in the odd layer, and the same goes for the even number rows. Thus, an even layer has 172*(59) + 172*(58) = 20124 balls in an even layer. Now, to get the total number of balls, it is simply 28*(20528) + 28*(20124) = 1138256 ping pong balls. However, we have not factored in the chairs in this calculation. We need to find how many ping pong balls can fit in the volume of a chair. Due to the chair's small size and weird structure, we will treat the balls as rectangular prisms because the approximation will be close in this case. The number of balls that can fit in all the chairs is 6.84/(0.04^3) = 106875. So the actual number of ping pong balls that can fit in a school bus is 1031381.

If we simply assumed they were cubes, then we would have gotten 50.76/(0.04^3) = 793125 balls, which shows that we wasted alot of space by our assumption of cubes. 